It's time to do some penetration testing of our site.
So let's put on our hoodies and head over to a dark, dingy basement.
That seems to be the stereotypical look of a hacker these days.
That and a Russian accent of course.
Nah, my Russian accent is bad.
So as we mentioned,
the weakness with digest is the fact that you can't store a
one-way hash of the password in anything but MD5,
which is no longer considered secure.
It actually is worse than that for digest.
Spring allows you to store the first MD5 hash,
the HA1, which is the username:realm:password in your identity store.
So let's generate this and update the UserDetailsService.
Next,
we set the PasswordAlreadyEncoded property to true on
the DigestAuthenticationFilter.
The filter will now not generate the HA1.
But it will use the one that's returned by the
UserDetailsService directly in the digest hash.
We will also set the CreateAuthentication token to true to force the
digest filter to authenticate the token as the AuthenticationManager in
the interceptor is not able to handle the HA1.
Now if our identity store is compromised and a hacker
got the usernames and the hashes, which is very common,
a lot of the major high-profile hacking incidents
haven't been because of SSL being cracked.
It's been the identity store being hacked and the
credentials stolen and published online,
for example.
And this is mainly due to the sloppy maintenance of the identity stores,
example being vulnerable to SQL injection,
the IT team throwing out all hard drives without cleaning them first,
a rogue ex-employee,
or even being checked into source control to be used for testing.
Now the first issue with this hash is that it can't be salted,
so it's very susceptible to brute force cracking attacks.
I think currently with MD5, thanks to the GPU cryptocurrency craze,
hackers can perform up to a billion hashes per second.
But a hacker doesn't really need to bother with that in
this case because the digest hash for authentication is
generated in the client's browser.
Hence,
the hacker can use the HA1 hash directly to generate
the digest and access the admin site, just like a password.
Let's access the site and hit Cancel.
We now have the realm and the nonce.
Now Spring is backward compatible to RFC 2069.
Hence by emitting the qop in the header when we make our authorization request,
it will default to 2069 rather than the more secure RFC 2617.
The hacker now doesn't need to worry about the client nonce or
the nonce count when generating the digest,
which makes things a bit more simpler.
I built a little utility class that generates the digest.
Let's add the username, the nonce, the HA1 stolen from the identity store,
the method and URI to generate the digest.
I will use Postman to create the HTTP request to access the admin page.
I add the digest authentication header and the generated digest in the response
property and set all the other required properties as well.
I now have access to the site.
If this site was form or basic authentication with HTTPS,
we have the option to encode the password with bcrypt.
Hence, the hacker would not be able to use the hash directly.
They would need to perform a brute force attack to first crack the password.
And with bcrypt, that's not very easy as it's designed to be very slow.
Now let's say the hacker hasn't breached the identity store.
But since the site doesn't currently use HTTPS,
the hacker has captured the authorization header while
packet sniffing for an admin user.
Since there are client and server nonces,
as well as the nonce count, replay attacks are off the table.
However, brute force is still in the cards though.
The attacker has enough information, including the username,
to perform a brute force offline attack.
Now since it is MD5, and if the system uses very poor password policies,
there is a good chance they can crack it.
To demonstrate this, I have created a small program that does this.
If I add all the details from the captured authorization header,
the program will generate the digest with different password combinations
until it matches the digest of the captured request,
a sort of dictionary attack.
Our poor password choice has revealed the password very quickly.
This is a weakness of digest without HTTPS.
It allows the attacker to use offline brute force attacks,
and you can't protect against it by limiting the number of
unsuccessful password attempts in your application.
Now having said that, digest is still useful.
It's quick to set up, better than form or basic if you don't use HTTPS.
Hence, it really comes down to your security requirements.
And if you have good, long passwords with numeric and special characters,
which are changed very frequently, then digest might be the option for you, especially if the application is internal behind a firewall.